This repository contains the code used to produce the results of the manuscript: **[An empirical comparison between stochastic and deterministic centroid initialisation for K-Means variations](https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.09946)**

## Generate manuscript results 

1. **code:** MATLAB code of the clustering algorithms, clustesring initialization methods, clustering assessment, datasets.
2. **genManuscriptMaterial:** Contains the scripts that produce the results in the manuscript: scripts that run the different processes on the different datasets, scripts that take these results and produce the figures and scripts that produces the latex tables in the appendix.


### Fast way

1. Add `NAG-init/genManuscriptMaterial/` to MATLAB path (including subfolders).
2. Run 'nag_init_graphs2.m' and select the folder `NAG-init/genManuscriptMaterial/data_for_plot/` when asked.
3. The folder `graphs` will be generated and will be populated with graphs separated to subfolders per dataset model.
4. The folder `NAG-init/genManuscriptMaterial/data_for_plot/` will contain the `myLatexTable.txt` which has the latex code of the tables in the supplementary material in a raw format and the `perf_summary.mat` which has the values of the performance summary table of the manuscript. 

_This method will produce the same results (numerically) as the ones in the manuscript_.


### Optimized slow way (takes a week or so, requires 30GB of disk space, generates small files)

1. Add `NAG-init/genManuscriptMaterial/` to MATLAB path (including subfolders).
2. Run `nag_init_methods_generate.m` and select an output folder when asked. A folder `NAG_init_res` will be created there.
3. Run `nag_init_graphs2.m` and select the folder `NAG_init_res` when asked.
4. The folder `NAG-init/genManuscriptMaterial/data_for_plot/` will contain the `myLatexTable.txt` which has the latex code of the tables in the supplementary material in a raw format and the `perf_summary.mat` which has the values of the performance summary table of the manuscript. 

Note 1: _Due to randomless the results will not be exactly the same (numerically) as the ones in the manuscript_.

Note 2: _This method first generates all the datasets that are going to be used for benchmarking (`data.mat`). Then it executes all the methods and saves the results in the folder `NAG_init_res`. All these results are generated inside the specified folder asked upon the script's execution_.


### Slow way (takes a week or so, requires ~300GB of disk space, produces big files)

1. Add `NAG-init/genManuscriptMaterial/` and `NAG-init/code/` to MATLAB path (including subfolders).
2. Execute each script file inside `NAG-init/genManuscriptMaterial/unique_datasets`: `nag_init_methods_clustering.m`, `nag_init_methods_equal.m`, `nag_init_methods_hdims.m`, `nag_init_methods_mixed.m`, `nag_init_methods_real.m`. Each sript will generate (if not existed) the folder `NAG_init_res` inside the selected path.
3. When all the scripts finish executing combine all the files inside the `NAG_init_res`.
4. Run `nag_init_graphs2.m` and select the folder 'NAG_init_res' when asked.

Note 1: _Due to randomless the results will not be exactly the same (numerically) as the ones in the manuscript_.

Note 2: _All the raw data are saved within the files generated by the scripts so that each file and each structure within it can be used as standalone for extra processing. This is the main reason for the extensive memory requirements. These files also contain extra measurements._

Note 3: _The very original raw files of the manuscript are available upon request_.


## Current dependences:

The results were produced using MATLAB R2018b with the following toolboxes:

1. Statistics and Machine Learning Toolbox
2. Parallel Computing Toolbox (if this toolbox is not available execution is still possible).
3. [The NAG Toolbox for MATLAB](https://www.nag.co.uk/nag-toolbox-matlab) to run Hartigan and Wong's K-Means.


## Citations for software and datasets that we have used in this project

### Datasets

**Clustering basic benchmark:**

[Fränti, Pasi, and Sami Sieranoja. "K-means properties on six clustering benchmark datasets." Applied Intelligence 48.12 (2018): 4743-4759.](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10489-018-1238-7)

**Gap models:**

[Tibshirani, Robert, Guenther Walther, and Trevor Hastie. "Estimating the number of clusters in a data set via the gap statistic." Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) 63.2 (2001): 411-423.](https://rss.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/1467-9868.00293)

**Weighted Gap models (YanYe):**

[Yan, Mingjin, and Keying Ye. "Determining the number of clusters using the weighted gap statistic." Biometrics 63.4 (2007): 1031-1037.](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/j.1541-0420.2007.00784.x)

**Brodinova dataset generator:**

[Brodinová, Šárka, et al. "Robust and sparse k-means clustering for high-dimensional data." Advances in Data Analysis and Classification (2017): 1-28.](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11634-019-00356-9)

MATLAB code was based on the R implementation of the algorithm; package: [`wrsk`](https://github.com/brodsa/wrsk)


### Clustering Algorithms

**Hartigan-Wong K-Means:**

MATLAB's and Python's default K-Means clustering is Lloyd's K-Means (initialized with the K-Means++ method) while R uses Hartigan-Wong' K-Means. Here we use [NAG Toolbox for MATLAB](https://www.nag.co.uk/nag-toolbox-matlab) Hartigan and Wong's K-Means implementation thus in order to use this algorithm the toolbox is required.

**ROBIN:**

MATLAB code was originally based on the R implementation of the algorithm; package: [`wrsk`](https://github.com/brodsa/wrsk)

**Density K-Means++:**

[Nidheesh, N., KA Abdul Nazeer, and P. M. Ameer. "An enhanced deterministic K-Means clustering algorithm for cancer subtype prediction from gene expression data." Computers in biology and medicine 91 (2017): 213-221.](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0010482517303402)

MATLAB code was based on the R implementation of the algorithm; code: [`dkmpp_0.1.0`](https://github.com/nidheesh-n/dkmpp)
